Update security overview with additional recommendations (#11016)
apache/druid: docs/operations/security-overview.md

  -->

This document provides an overview of Apache Druid security features, configuration instructions, and some best practices to secure Druid.

By default, security features in Druid are disabled, which simplifies the initial deployment experience. However, security features must be configured in a production deployment. These features include TLS, authentication, and authorization.

> ## Best practices

Reviewer: Thanks for putting these best practices together. Reading through them, I made a bunch of comments. Here is some structure that I think will help.

We should break this into a few sections
1. Druid cluster set up
1a. Run as a non root user
1b. Disable javascript
1c. Enable authentication  and authorization
2.  Network setup
2a. Enable TLS
2b. Limit access to the cluster, etc.
3. Authentication + Authorization
3a. Points about authentication and authorization, minimum privileges, etc.

* Run Druid as an unprivileged Unix user. Do not run Druid as the root user.
   > **WARNING!** \

>    Druid administrator users have the same OS permissions as the Unix user account running Druid. If the Druid process is running under the OS root user account, then Druid administrators can read or write all files that the root account has access to, including sensitive files such as `/etc/passwd`.

Reviewer: > Druid administrator

Is there documentation anywhere that talks about who a Druid administrator is. I think users coming from other systems will not be aware that someone who has write privileges to any datasource is considered an administrator. This is a really important fact an operator should be aware of when they are thinking of securing their Druid cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users with write privileges to any data source are considered as a Druid administrator. Druid administrator users have the same OS permissions as the Unix user account running Druid. If the Druid process is running under the OS root user account, then Druid administrators can read or write all files that the root account has access to, including sensitive files such as `/etc/passwd`.
```

* Enable authentication to the Druid cluster for production environments and other environments that can be accessed by untrusted networks.

> * Do not expose the Druid Console without authentication on untrusted networks. Authenticated Druid Console users have the same permissions as the OS user running the Druid Console process.

Reviewer: I think this should say authorization instead of authentication. Authenticated users who only have READ DATASOURCE privileges, can use the web console without access to the files on the Druid server.

```suggestion
* Do not expose the Druid Console without authorization enabled. If authorization is not enabled, any user that has access to the web console will have the same permissions as the OS user running the Druid process.
```

> * Use an API gateway to restrict access from untrusted networks, create an allow list of specific APIs that your users need to access, and implement account lockout and throttling features.

Reviewer: What is an account lockout? Are these throttling features something that should be implemented outside of Druid?

Reviewer 2: Yes, those are features provided by API gateways.

Author: Everything in that list should be in the API gateway. Might be clearer with sub-bullets.

> * When possible, use firewall and other network layer filtering to only expose Druid services and ports specifically required for your use case. For example, only expose Broker ports to downstream applications that execute queries. You can limit access to a specific IP address or IP range to further tighten and enhance security.

Reviewer: I think this point should be collapsed with the previous point. They're both talking about restricting access to API end-points via different tools - an API gateway or a firewall

Author: Now that we have grouped these, I think it is OK to keep them as separate points.

> * Only grant `STATE READ`, `STATE WRITE`, and `DATASOURCE WRITE` permissions to highly-trusted users. These permissions allows users to access resources on behalf of the Druid server process regardless of the datasource.

Reviewer: This should be the point right after "enable authentication". It should be something like "Enable authorization because ..."

Typing out this comment made me realize there's a big overlap between this point and line 39. We'll want to put those 2 points closer to each other I think

* If your Druid client application allows less-trusted users to control the input source or firehose of an ingestion task, validate the URLs from the users. It is possible to point unchecked URLs to other locations and resources within your network or local file system.
* Enable TLS to encrypt communication within the cluster.
* You should only grant `WRITE` permissions to any `DATASOURCE` to trusted users. Druid's trust model assumes those users have the same privileges as the operating system user that runs the Druid process.

> * Grant users the minimum permissions necessary to perform their functions. For instance, do not allow users who only need to query data to write to data sources or view state.

Reviewer: This overlaps with the point about authorization

> * Disable JavaScript, as noted in the [Security section](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/development/javascript.html#security) of the JavaScript guide.

Reviewer: This should probably be higher

## Authentication and Authorization

You can configure authentication and authorization to control access to the the Druid APIs. The first step is enabling TLS for the cluster nodes. This is essential to ensure passwords and authentication tokens are encrypted over the network.
Then configure users, roles, and permissions, as described in the following sections. 

The configuration settings mentioned below are primarily located in the `common.runtime.properties` file. Note that you need to make the configuration changes on all Druid server in the cluster.

> 

Reviewer: It looks like this title section is accidentally duplicated. More info seems to be written starting on line 121

## Enable TLS

Enabling TLS encrypts the traffic between external clients and the Druid cluster and traffic between services within the cluster.

### Generating keys
Before you enable TLS in Druid, generate the keystore and truststore. When one Druid process, e.g. Broker, contacts another Druid process , e.g. Historical, the first service is a client for the second service, considered the server.

The client uses a trustStore that contains certificates trusted by the client. For example, the Broker.

The server uses a keyStore that contains private keys and certificate chain used to securely identify itself.

> The following example demonstrates how to use Java keytool to generate the keyStore for the server and then create a trustStore to trust the key for the client:

Reviewer: nit: Since keytool is a tool, perhaps it should be escape quotes. Maybe we should capitalize KeyStore since that's how I see it show up when I search google?

```suggestion
The following example demonstrates how to use Java `keytool` to generate the KeyStore for the server and then create a trustStore to trust the key for the client:
```

> 1. Generate the keyStore with Java keytool:

Reviewer: nit: Then the spelling file won't need keytool to be added to it
```suggestion
1. Generate the keyStore with Java `keytool`:
```

](https://www.eclipse.org/jetty/documentation/jetty-11/operations-guide/index.html#og-keystore) from the Jetty documentation.

   > WARNING: Do not use use self-signed certificates for production environments. Instead, rely on your current public key infrastructure to generate and distribute trusted keys.
   

### Update Druid TLS configurations
Edit `common.runtime.properties` for all Druid services on all nodes. Add or update the following TLS options. Restart the cluster when you are finished.

```
# Turn on TLS globally
druid.enableTlsPort=true

# Disable non-TLS communicatoins
druid.enablePlaintextPort=false

# For Druid processes acting as a client
# Load simple-client-sslcontext to enable client side TLS
# Add the following to extension load list
druid.extensions.loadList=[......., "simple-client-sslcontext"]

# Setup client side TLS
druid.client.https.protocol=TLSv1.2
druid.client.https.trustStoreType=jks
druid.client.https.trustStorePath=truststore.jks # replace with correct turstStore file
druid.client.https.trustStorePassword=secret123  # replace with your own password

# Setup server side TLS
druid.server.https.keyStoreType=jks

> druid.server.https.keyStorePath=imply-keystore.jks # replace with correct keyStore file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
druid.server.https.keyStorePath=my-keystore.jks # replace with correct keyStore file
```

  -->

This document provides an overview of Apache Druid security features, configuration instructions, and some best practices to secure Druid.

By default, security features in Druid are disabled, which simplifies the initial deployment experience. However, security features must be configured in a production deployment. These features include TLS, authentication, and authorization.

> ## Best practices

Reviewer 3: Suggest linking these configs somewhere in this section.

- Ingestion security configs: https://github.com/apache/druid/blob/master/docs/configuration/index.md#ingestion-security-configuration
- JDBC connections security configs: https://github.com/apache/druid/blob/master/docs/configuration/index.md#jdbc-connections-to-external-databases

The following recommendations apply to the Druid cluster setup:
* Run Druid as an unprivileged Unix user. Do not run Druid as the root user.
   > **WARNING!** \
   Druid administrators have the same OS permissions as the Unix user account running Druid. See [Authentication and authorization model](security-user-auth.md#authentication-and-authorization-model). If the Druid process is running under the OS root user account, then Druid administrators can read or write all files that the root account has access to, including sensitive files such as `/etc/passwd`.
* Enable authentication to the Druid cluster for production environments and other environments that can be accessed by untrusted networks.
* Enable authorization and do not expose the Druid Console without authorization enabled. If authorization is not enabled, any user that has access to the web console has the same privileges as the operating system user that runs the Druid Console process.
* Grant users the minimum permissions necessary to perform their functions. For instance, do not allow users who only need to query data to write to data sources or view state.

> * * Disable JavaScript, as noted in the [Security section](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/development/javascript.html#security) of the JavaScript guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Disable JavaScript, as noted in the [Security section](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/development/javascript.html#security) of the JavaScript guide.
```

> The following recommendations apply the network where Druid runs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following recommendations apply to the network where Druid runs:
```

* Enable TLS to encrypt communication within the cluster.
* Use an API gateway to:
  - Restrict access from untrusted networks
  - Create an allow list of specific APIs that your users need to access
  - Implement account lockout and throttling features.

> * When possible, use firewall and other network layer filtering to only expose Druid services and ports specifically required for your use case. For example, only expose Broker ports to downstream applications that execute queries. You can limit access to a specific IP address or IP range to further tighten and enhance security.

Reviewer: The previous bullet and this one make the same point, just with different technologies. I think we should collapse them and tell operators they can use either an API gateway, or a firewall or something else...

Author: These are grouped now.

The following recommendation applies to Druids authorization and authentication model:
* Only grant `WRITE` permissions to any `DATASOURCE` to trusted users. Druid's trust model assumes those users have the same privileges as the operating system user that runs the Druid Console process. 

> * Only grant `STATE READ`, `STATE WRITE`, and `DATASOURCE WRITE` permissions to highly-trusted users. These permissions allows users to access resources on behalf of the Druid server process regardless of the datasource.

Reviewer 3: I think `CONFIG WRITE` should be an adminitrator-ish permission too as you can update dynamic system configs such as lookups with it. I'm not sure about `STATE READ` though. What bad things can happen when a malicious user have the `STATE READ` permission?

1. Add the `druid-basic-security` extension to `druid.extensions.loadList` in `common.runtime.properties`. For the quickstart installation, for example, the properties file is at `conf/druid/cluster/_common`:
   ```

>    druid.extensions.loadList=["druid-basic-security", "druid-histogram", "druid-datasketches", "druid-kafka-indexing-service", "imply-utility-belt"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   druid.extensions.loadList=["druid-basic-security", "druid-histogram", "druid-datasketches", "druid-kafka-indexing-service"]
```

	```
	curl -u admin:password1 -XPOST https://my-coordinator-ip:8281/druid-ext/basic-security/authorization/db/basic/users/myname
	```
3. Create authorizer roles to control permissions by issuing a POST request to `druid-ext/basic-security/authorization/db/MyBasicMetadataAuthorizer/roles/<ROLENAME>`. For example: 
	```
   curl -u admin:password1 -XPOST https://my-coordinator-ip:8281/druid-ext/basic-security/authorization/db/basic/roles/myrole
   ```
4. Assign roles to users by issuing a POST request to `druid-ext/basic-security/authorization/db/MyBasicMetadataAuthorizer/users/<USERNAME>/roles/<ROLENAME>`. For example: 
	```
	curl -u admin:password1 -XPOST https://my-coordinator-ip:8281/druid-ext/basic-security/authorization/db/basic/users/myname/roles/myrole | jq
	```
5. Finally, attach permissions to the roles to control how they can interact with Druid at `druid-ext/basic-security/authorization/db/MyBasicMetadataAuthorizer/roles/<ROLENAME>/permissions`. 
	For example: 
	```

> 	curl -u admin:password1 -H'Content-Type: application/json' -XPOST --data-binary @perms.json https://my-coordinator-ip:8281/druid-ext/basic-security/authorization/db/basic/roles/myrole/permissions

Reviewer: why the change to `password1`?

> The default Coordinator API port is 8081 for non-TLS connections and 8281 for secured connections.

> 1. Create a user by issuing a POST request to `druid-ext/basic-security/authentication/db/MyBasicMetadataAuthenticator/users/<USERNAME>`, replacing USERNAME with the *new* username you are trying to create. For example: 

Reviewer: This example talks about using the druid basic security extension. The rest of this doc talks about principles that apply across Druid. It feels like we want to separate this into separate pages.

Since this example already existed in this page, I don't think we need to move it in this PR, but perhaps in a follow up one.

Congratulations, you have configured permissions for user-assigned roles in Druid!

## Druid security trust model

> Like all other security systems, trust is the foundation of the Druid security model. Druid administrators and read-only users are trusted users. Therefore, they are not expected to act maliciously.

Reviewer: I think it's reasonable to expect administrators to be trusted users, but the requirement that read-only act in a non-malicious way is not necessarily true.

Reviewer 2: Actually, I think any authenticated user is expected to not act in a non-malicious way. If you are worried about those users, you should build another layer on top of Druid?

Author: What can a read-only user do to attack? Asking for my own knowledge. Like if I can't write something, I can't submit malicious code or other, right? (I may be naive on this front).

Based on this expectation, Druid operates according to the following principles:

From the inner most layer:
1. Druid processes run within the system user context. They have access to the local files granted to the specified system user.
2. The Druid ingestion system can create new processes to execute tasks. Those tasks inherit the user of their parent process. This means that any user authorized to submit an ingestion task can use the ingestion task permissions to read or write any local files that the Druid process has access to.

> 

Reviewer: When a druid cluster is configured to talk to an external resource (for example S3, an internal service, etc.) The user submitting the task also has permissions to talk to the external resource

> Note: Only grant the permission to submit ingestion tasks to trusted users because they can read and write to local file system.

Within the cluster:

> 1. Druid assumes it operates on an isolated, protected network where no reachable IP within the network is under adversary control. It is the responsibility of system implementers to setup firewalls and other methods of protection.

Reviewer: This is a little vague. Is the operator supposed to protect incoming connections to Druid or outgoing or both?

As it's written it seems like the expectation is that restrictions should be set up for both incoming and outgoing connections. Most systems I know of primarily concern themselves with incoming connections, but I'm not a security expert.

Author: I think you may need to secure incoming and outgoing, no? If Druid runs as a user that could have permissions may have access to other network resources. This almost begs the question of do we need a security whitepaper type doc with illustrative examples of the best practices. (Not the goal of this PR).

Here's my attempt to clarify FWIW:
> Druid assumes it operates on an isolated, protected network where no reachable IP within the network is under adversary control. When you implement Druid, take care to setup firewalls and other security measures to secure both inbound and outbound connections.

> 2. Druid supports TLS encryption for network traffic, including API calls and data transfers.

Reviewer: I don't think TLS encryption is part of the trust model.

Reviewer 2: Any suggestions on how we describe that the network traffic is protected?

Author: @2bethere , @suneet-s TLS is "A" trust model if not "Druid's" model. We have already mentioned in Best Practices section to Enable TLS. So maybe we are covered on this front?

Reviewer 2: Ha, I see. Maybe this:
```suggestion
2. Druid assuming network traffic within the cluster is encrypted, including API calls and data transfers. By default, this is implemented via TLS.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Druid assumes network traffic within the cluster is encrypted, including API calls and data transfers. The default encryption implementation uses TLS.
```

3. Druid assumes auxiliary services such as the metadata store and ZooKeeper nodes are not under adversary control.

Cluster to deep storage:
1. Druid does not make assumptions about the security for deep storage. It follows the system's native security policies to authenticate and authorize with deep storage.
2. Druid does not encrypt files for deep storage. Instead, it relies on the storage system's native encryption capabilities to ensure compatibility with encryption schemes across all storage types.

Cluster to client:
1. Druid authenticates with the client based on the configured authenticator.

> 2. Druid only executes queries when an authorizer grants permission. The default configuration is `allowAll authorizer`.

Reviewer: Slight suggestion since it's not just queries, but even things like loading data, reading configuration, changing state, etc. The authorizer must grant permissions for any of these actions to be performed.

```suggestion
2. Druid only performs actions when an authorizer grants permission. The default configuration is `allowAll authorizer`.
```

Congratulations, you have configured permissions for user-assigned roles in Druid!

## Druid security trust model
Like all other security systems, trust is the foundation of the Druid security model. Druid administrators and read-only users are trusted users. Therefore, they are not expected to act maliciously.

Based on this expectation, Druid operates according to the following principles:

From the inner most layer:
1. Druid processes run within the system user context. They have access to the local files granted to the specified system user.
2. The Druid ingestion system can create new processes to execute tasks. Those tasks inherit the user of their parent process. This means that any user authorized to submit an ingestion task can use the ingestion task permissions to read or write any local files or external resources that the Druid process has access to.

> > Note: Only grant the permission to submit ingestion tasks to trusted users because they can read and write to local file system.

Reviewer: It's more than just the filesystem, they can make network calls as well.

```suggestion
> Note: Only grant the permission to submit ingestion tasks to trusted users because they can act as the Druid process.
```

Congratulations, you have configured permissions for user-assigned roles in Druid!

## Druid security trust model
Within Druid's trust model there users can have different authorization levels:

> - Users with resource write permissions can are allowed to anything that the druid process can do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users with resource write permissions can are allowed to do anything that the druid process can do.
```

Reviewer 3: Should `can` also be eliminated? Like, `Users with resource write permissions are allowed to do`

- Authenticated read only users can execute queries against resources to which they have permissions.
- An authenticated user without any permissions is allowed to execute queries that don't require access to a resource.

Additionally, Druid operates according to the following principles:

From the inner most layer:
1. Druid processes have the same access to the local files granted to the specified system user running the process.
2. The Druid ingestion system can create new processes to execute tasks. Those tasks inherit the user of their parent process. This means that any user authorized to submit an ingestion task can use the ingestion task permissions to read or write any local files or external resources that the Druid process has access to.

> > Note: Only grant the permission to submit ingestion tasks to trusted users because they can  act as the Druid process.

Reviewer 3: Here and [this figure](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/11016/files#diff-3e8eb443238c8a04b52e7691033cfa2b8bd133611434b548c5cd9eaa3a8a72c3R189) talk about the permission to submit ingestion tasks. This seems ambiguous to me. Maybe it would be better to say the `DATASOURCE WRITE` permission instead.
